#Field	Value	Example	CommentsSTUDY_alias	fierer_hand_study	fierer_handstudy	One study per publication: this is used as an id to link filesSTUDY_TITLE	"The influence of sex, handedness, and washing on the diversity of hand surface bacteria"	"The influence of sex, handedness, and washing on the diversity of hand surface bacteria"	Expected (or actual) title of the paperSTUDY_TYPE	Metagenomics	Metagenomics	"Should be ""Metagenomics"" for 16S surveys"STUDY_ABSTRACT	"This project aims to undertake global surveys of microbial diversity in a range of free-living and host-associated communities. The importance of the project is that it will provide a comparison of microbial diversity in a range of habitats and provide a platform to underpin many studies of community assembly, diversity, etc. Bacteria thrive on and within the human body. One of the largest human-associated microbial habitats is the skin surface, which harbors large numbers of bacteria that can have important effects on health. We examined the palmar surfaces of the dominant and nondominant hands of 51 healthy young adult volunteers to characterize bacterial diversity on hands and to assess its variability within and between individuals. We used a novel pyrosequencing- based method that allowed us to survey hand surface bacterial communities at an unprecedented level of detail. The diversity of skin-associated bacterial communities was surprisingly high; a typical hand surface harbored >150 unique species-level bacterial phylotypes, and we identified a total of 4,742 unique phylotypes across all of the hands examined. Although there was a core set of bacterial taxa commonly found on the palm surface, we observed pronounced intra- and interpersonal variation in bacterial community composition: hands from the same individual shared only 17% of their phylotypes, with different individuals sharing only 13%. Women had significantly higher diversity than men, and community composition was significantly affected by handedness, time since last hand washing, and an individual's sex. The variation within and between individuals in microbial ecology illustrated by this study emphasizes the challenges inherent in defining what constitutes a 'healthy' bacterial community; addressing these challenges will be critical for the International Human Microbiome Project. Bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA sequences have been deposited in the Short Read Archive."	"This project aims to undertake global surveys of microbial diversity in a range of free-living and host-associated communities. The importance of the project is that it will provide a comparison of microbial diversity in a range of habitats and provide a platform to underpin many studies of community assembly, diversity, etc. Bacteria thrive on and within the human body. One of the largest human-associated microbial habitats is the skin surface, which harbors large numbers of bacteria that can have important effects on health. We examined the palmar surfaces of the dominant and nondominant hands of 51 healthy young adult volunteers to characterize bacterial diversity on hands and to assess its variability within and between individuals. We used a novel pyrosequencing- based method that allowed us to survey hand surface bacterial communities at an unprecedented level of detail. The diversity of skin-associated bacterial communities was surprisingly high; a typical hand surface harbored >150 unique species-level bacterial phylotypes, and we identified a total of 4,742 unique phylotypes across all of the hands examined. Although there was a core set of bacterial taxa commonly found on the palm surface, we observed pronounced intra- and interpersonal variation in bacterial community composition: hands from the same individual shared only 17% of their phylotypes, with different individuals sharing only 13%. Women had significantly higher diversity than men, and community composition was significantly affected by handedness, time since last hand washing, and an individual's sex. The variation within and between individuals in microbial ecology illustrated by this study emphasizes the challenges inherent in defining what constitutes a 'healthy' bacterial community; addressing these challenges will be critical for the International Human Microbiome Project. Bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA sequences have been deposited in the Short Read Archive."	"Abstract, e.g. of the publication"STUDY_DESCRIPTION	Targeted Gene Survey from Human Skin	Targeted Gene Survey from Human Skin	"Use ""Targeted Gene Survey"" for 16S or other target gene studies"CENTER_NAME	CCME	CCME	"NCBI-approved name of sequencing center, e.g. WUGSC"CENTER_PROJECT_NAME	NULL	NULL	"Name of project as used by the sequencing center, NULL if none."PROJECT_ID	34527	34527	"Project ID, assigned by SRA, leave blank if not yet assigned."PMID	19004758	19004758	"PubMed ID of paper describing project, if supplied will write out STUDY_LINK block, can be multiple (comma-delimited)"